# Superfund cleanups and near-port community composition
### The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has been overseeing the Superfund program, addressing contaminated sites since the 1980s. As the agency adapts its approach to incorporate environmental justice during cleanups, concerns about environmental gentrification persist. This project analyzes how communities with Superfund sites have evolved, specifically focusing on changes in socioeconomic and ecological compositions over the past four decades in near-port communities on the West Coast. This phase of the project centers on Seattle and socioeconomic data within the city.  
The project is in development by Ashli Blow. For questions about this repo, email her at [ashlib@uw.edu](mailto:ashlib@uw.edu). 

## Project Details

### Definitions 
* *Environmental Gentrification*: Urban planners and social scientists [define](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/263154584_Wiped_Out_by_the_Greenwave_Environmental_Gentrification_and_the_Paradoxical_Politics_of_Urban_Sustainability) environmental or green gentrification as the cycle of gentrification triggered by environmental cleanups or redevelopment, leading to increased desirability and demographic shifts. 
* *Ecologic Composition*: Encompasses vegetation, pollution, and water quality characteristics.
* *National Priorities List* : The EPA's [National Priorities List](https://www.epa.gov/superfund/superfund-national-priorities-list-npl) (NPL) is the list of sites with known releases or threatened releases of hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants throughout the United States and its territories.
* *Near-port Communities*: When emissions from ports disproportionately impact people in nearby communities that are often comprised of low income and people of color, according to the [EPA](https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/ports-initiative/near-port-communities_.html).
* *Socioeconomic Composition*: Involves income, education, and racial characteristics.
  
### Background 
Seventy-three million people reside within three miles of a Superfund site, with a higher concentration of people who are low-income, indigenous, and of color, according to the EPA. 

The EPA has consistently regulated and refined the Superfund program, which plays a crucial role by providing states and their communities with the financial resources needed to clean up sites with hazardous waste. In recent years the EPA is adapting once again, this time to address environmental justice concerns throughout the Superfund clean-up process, formally known as the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA). CERCLA went into effect in 1980. 

An emerging concern is environmental gentrification, where cleanups can unintentionally contribute to gentrification cycles, resulting in increased property values and rent, and influencing economic and demographic shifts.	

> When identifying the potential problem, a critical gap emerges – the absence of clear policies or procedures from the EPA and local governments leaves historically disadvantaged communities exposed to the adverse effects of environmental gentrification.

The focus of this analysis aims to explore the facets of gentrification in Census tracts with cleaned-up Superfund sites. Facets include income, race, and property values.  

### Research Question and Outcome 
The primary research question driving this study is: Have neighborhoods with Superfund cleanups shifted in terms of socioeconomic and ecological compositions over the past four decades?

Answering this question holds significant implications for movement organizers, policymakers, and scientists, as it can guide the prioritization of policies and procedures aimed at preserving existing populations, both human and environmental, in their current locations.

### Datasets 
This analysis integrates geographic, socioeconomic, and ecological data, incorporating variables spanning five decades, from 1980 to 2020.

**Fixed Effects**

The fixed effects in this analysis encompass jurisdiction and time, specifically tracts and decennial years spanning from 1980 through 2020 as identified by the U.S. Census Bureau. This dataset was generated by extracting [Superfund site coordinates](https://www.epa.gov/superfund/search-superfund-sites-where-you-live) and converting them into 2010 standardized census tract boundaries.

Additionally, each census tract is assigned a binary variable indicating NPL (0) or Deleted NPL (1), with the latter denoting a successfully cleaned-up site. This process collectively establishes the policy variable "cercla," a binary indicator showcasing census tracts that have undergone cleanup efforts from 1990 through 2020.

**Socioeconomic Data**

Much of the socioeconomic data is collected from the IPUMS' [National Historic GIS time series table](https://www.nhgis.org/time-series-tables#standardization) links together comparable statistics from multiple U.S. censuses in one downloadable bundle, because census tracts change over time. NHGIS offers two types of tables: standardized and nominally integrated. The standardized time series tables provide 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2020 data for 2010 census units. The nominally integrated tables are not standarized to 2010 boundaries, but these tables share common variables or categories across different time points for comparable statistics. Nominally integrated tables prove particularly valuable for mapping spatial patterns across different periods, though their utility for linear regressions may be limited. The variables in the dataset are as follows. 

* **Housing**: A housing unit is a house, an apartment, a mobile home, a group of rooms, or a single room identified as living quarters. This is standardized data.
* **Race**: Population counts for specific race and ethnicity subgroups. It comprises census variables such as White, Black, Hispanic/Latino, Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander, Asian American, and American Indian and Alaskan Native. This is standardized data. 
* **18 Over/Under**: The population of people under 18 and people who are 18 and over, specifying the population of children and adults. This is standardized data. 
* **Tract Population**: The population of people who live in a census tract. This is standardized data. 
* **Income**: Income by households, divided into income brackets. This is nominally integrated data. 
* **Occupancy Type**: Differentiates between owned and rented housing. This is nominally integrated data.
* **Property Values**: Property values were not obtained for this project as of March 7, 2024. 
 
**Ecologic Data**
* [NCEP/NCAR Reanalysis Data, Surface Temperature](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/NCEP_RE_surface_temp)
* [Copernicus CORINE Land Cover](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/tags/landcover)
* [USFS Tree Map](https://developers.google.com/earth-engine/datasets/catalog/USFS_GTAC_TreeMap_v2016)

### Tools and Packages
* Matplotlib
* Pandas
* Geopandas
* Numpy
* Fiona
* Shapely
* Statsmodels

### Methodology and Approach
Aggregated variables and merged socioeconomic and ecologic data with fixed effects (location and time) in a map, with a focus on the west coast. Further focused on the city of Seattle for insights into city-wide comparisons between census tracts with and without Superfund sites. Analyzed through choropleth mapping. 

Summary statistics are included along with a couple of linear models for race and income variables. 

### Notebooks 
Two notebooks comprise the projects. 

- **[States Notebook](https://github.com/ashliblow/superfundshifts/blob/main/Notebooks/States.ipynb):** This notebook includes nationwide and west coast geospatial anlysis and regression analysis with fixed effects and socioeconomic data. 
- **[Seattle Notebook](https://github.com/ashliblow/superfundshifts/blob/main/Notebooks/Seattle_Socio.ipynb):** This notebook includes Seattle-specific geospatial analysis with fixed effects and socioeconomic data. 

### Conclusion
More analysis is needed to see definitive relationships between Superfund site cleanups and neighborhood composition shifts. But takeaways from this phase of this project includes the following. 

- **Nationwide:** Cleanup of Superfund sites has continuously  increased across the country the last four decades. 

- **Regionally (West Coast)** Hispanic-Latino population has a significant decrease in Census tracts with cleaned up Superfund sites on the west coast. 

- **Citywide (Seattle):** Seattle has a wealthier population growing across the city and in South Park, the neighborhood with a Superfund site. Causation can not be tied to Superfund site influence from this mapping. 

### Future Direction 
Next steps for further anaylsis could inclde the following. 

- **Generate More Maps:** Apply methodology for Seattle to other West Coast cities with deep water ports like Portland, Oakland, and Los Angles. Also, create maps that show for ecological composition. 

- **Generate More Variables:** Apply methodology for race and income variables to property value variables. Also, consider evaluating income variable to account for inflation. 

- **Look For Heterogeneity:** Run regressions focused on population growth to better indentify the relationship between Superfund sites and neighborhood composition shifts. 

### References 
*Environmental Protection Agency, EPA “Supporting Environmental Justice at Superfund Sites” (2023)* 

*Environmental Protection Agency, EPA, “Superfund History” (2023)*

*Spencer Banzhaf and Eleanor McCormick, “Moving Beyond Cleanup: Identifying the Crucibles of Environmental Gentrification” (2023)* 
